Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Sooner or later a true science fiction fan
has to attend a convention. Conventions range from the incredible Worldcon, a
world science fiction convention with thousands of people in attendance to small
local gatherings with less than 100 fans and then there are the conventions in
the middle big enough to attract first-rank authors and have a fascinating
dealer's room but small enough to create a comfortable intimate atmosphere
between guests and fans. Such a convention is AggieCon, a yearly science fiction
gathering held in College Station, Texas. AggieCon is organized and run by
students at Texas A&M University. At the last AggieCon, Number 14, held in the
spring of 1983, we spoke with Gordon Lewis, the head of the AggieCon committee. We
asked him to give us a little of the background behind AggieCon. AggieCon
Number One so far as I know was not originally called AggieCon. It was just
called the Science the Texas A&M Science Fiction Convention, or
something to that effect, and they just decided it would be real fun to invite an
author down and have a little miniature convention that lasted two days, and I
think they showed three films. I saw a report on AggieCon Four - I think AggieCon
three was the first one that was called AggieCon - I saw a report on number four.
They took in a total of eight hundred dollars and spent four hundred dollars and
they had two guests and showed six films total and that was about all the
programming they had. And since then we have moved onward and upward to better
and better things to where this year we have 30 guests, we're showing eight major
films at night, we have uh films running all day long, and we have the panels and
the readings and our budget this year is something like uh to take in 15 000 and
to spend around 14 000, was what was budgeted.
Putting on a major science fiction convention as AggieCon certainly is takes a
good deal of work the work is done by a committee on the Texas A&M campus called
Cepheid Variable. We asked Lewis what the word cepheid variable meant. A cepheid
variable is a pulsating star which um there is one in the Cephas star system and
if you look at it it will appear to grow brighter and dimmer and occasionally to
change colors and that's where we took our name from. What does Cepheid Variable
actually do? Cepheid Variable is a science fiction and fantasy committee. It's out
of the student programs office here on campus and because we are a committee we
do programming through the student programs office. Some of the other clubs on
campus do their own activities and programming just for their own members but we
program for the entire university as well as AggieCon, which is for people who
aren't even members of the university. Is AggieCon the only responsibility of
Cepheid Variable? That's our major reason for being; however, we also program all
year long. We show science fiction fantasy films here on campus and we are a
meeting place for science fiction fantasy fans here on campus. Also on occasion
we do send delegates to other conventions within the state as well as outside
the state. Usually in the summertime though because most of our students are busy
during the fall and spring. Lewis says 95 percent of the members of Cepheid
Variable are students at the university but not all. Uh we have a few who are not.
Most of them are like uh we have one former student we have one person who is
laying out for a few semesters while he works and that way he can become a Texas
resident and not have to pay out of state tuition and uh Becky Matthews, who is
one of our guests, we kind of count her as a member of the convention committee
because she was chairman of AggieCon 11 and uh has helped us with the roast
program this year. Next time we'll talk with Gordon Lewis about the fascinating
attractions AggieCon has to offer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Aggicon is one of the best known
science fiction conventions in the Southwest. It's held each year on the campus of Texas A&M
University and is organized by the students at the university. Gordon Lewis, the head of the
committee which is responsible for Aggicon, tells us what Aggicon has to offer a science fiction
fan. There of course are the movies. I believe they have movies that are just about every
science fiction convention. We have the dealer's room which you can find just about anything and
everything in there from books to weapons to posters and other kind of paraphernalia from movies
and the world of fantasy. We have the artists and the authors. They sit on panels, some of the
authors do readings for us. We had a NASA presentation yesterday. We have had one of those
for the past three years, and we consider that to be pretty regular at this
convention. We're having a slideshow this afternoon on Don Punchatz's artwork,
and we try to have an art slideshow, or at least we've been trying to, for the
past three years. We have the two movie companies that are here, Disney and
Columbia Pictures, that are promoting films, and I believe that since I've been
here at AggieCon 12, I believe we didn't have any movie promotions, but at 11
and 13, and at this one, we have had movie promotions. We have trivia quizzes.
We have the amateur art contest. We have the art auction, as well as other stuff
that's auctioned off. This year we had the world premiere performance of Mr.
Harry Harrison's play. That is a first, as far as I know.
We also have the pro art gallery, where pro artists can display their work, and
the fans can come and look at it. We have an autograph session, a guest
reception. Plus, you can usually find the guests down in the party room, if
they're not doing anything else.
The authors at this year's AggieCon, the 14th, would have interested any science
fiction fan. Harry Harrison was the guest of honor, and there was also a special
guest, Stephen R. Donaldson. Harrison has written science fiction for a long
time, and is known for such works as the Death World books, and for the
stainless steel rat novels. And Donaldson is one of the hottest fantasy authors
working today. His two Chronicles of Thomas Covenant series have sold in the
millions. Lewis says that this year's AggieCon gave more emphasis to one aspect
of science fiction and fantasy that many casual readers don't give much thought
to. This year we have really tried to do more stuff for the artists than we ever
have in the past. Usually we have like one panel, the amateur art contest, the
auction, and that's about it. And this year we've programmed two panels on art.
We again have the auction and the contest. We have more judges for the contest
this year than we've had in the past. The artist guest of honor was Michael
Whelan, who for the past two years running has been given the Nebula Award as
the best science fiction fantasy artist of the year. Anyone who reads science
fiction has seen Whelan's work. His paintings are found on the covers of many
science fiction and fantasy books. One of his latest creations was on the dust
jacket of Arthur C. Clarke's best-selling novel, 2010, Odyssey 2. We asked Lewis
how AggieCon compared with other science fiction conventions in Texas. Well, we
have been billed as the largest annual science fiction convention so far as
attendance is concerned. Overall, I do believe that we have a larger attendance
if you count both the one-day passes as well as the full convention passes than
what other science fiction conventions have. A lot of that is probably due to
the students here on campus. But we do bring in quite a few outside individuals.
For instance, this year we had 60 non-student convention passes for the full
convention that were sold in advance. That means before March 1st. We'll
conclude our conversation with Gordon Lewis on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. We are talking with Gordon Lewis, head of
the Texas A&M Student Committee, which put on this year's successful AggieCon.
And this year's AggieCon, the 14th, has to be considered a success. The guest of
honor was science fiction author Harry Harrison, making one of his occasional
trips to the United States from his home in Ireland. The special guest of honor
was Stephen R. Donaldson. Probably no fantasy author since Tolkien has sold more
books than Donaldson has. His Chronicles of Thomas Covenant 1 and 2 have sold in
the millions. The activities at AggieCon 14 were numerous and fascinating. Fans
could mingle with the authors and ask questions about their work, for one thing.
And this opportunity would have to be the heart of any science fiction
convention. But there was also a well-stocked dealer's room, movies 24 hours a
day, panels, art shows, a masquerade. In other words, enough activity to give a
fan a complete immersion in science fiction for almost four full days. We asked
Gordon Lewis how they went about getting authors to be guests of AggieCon. Well,
usually what we like to do is there are some authors here in Texas, as well as
some artists, who are kind of like traditionalists at AggieCon. They've been
coming for several years. We try and invite all of them, and usually most of
them will come down here. So far as our major guests, we have the guest of
honor, and we have a special guest. This year we were going to have co-guests of
honor. We were going to have Ann McCaffrey as well as Harry Harrison, but Ann
had to back out because of medical problems.
Harry Harrison was then left as our only guest of honor, which in the past we've
only had one. We have our special guest, like I said. We have a toastmaster.
This year it's Dr. Chad Oliver from the University of Texas, and he will be
presenting a program at the banquet this evening. He said he'd give us 15
minutes of wit and humor. Chad Oliver has been writing science fiction for over
30 years and has been a regular feature at AggieCon. Some of the other local
authors attending AggieCon 14 were Howard Waldrop, Lee Kennedy, Ardath Mayhar,
and George Proctor. The out-of-state writers included Ed Bryant and Bob
Vardeman. We asked Louis what the biggest problem in planning AggieCon was. The
fact that all of the officers are students, and we all have our homework here
from the university, plus all of the paperwork that is required. And I think the
only reason that was a real problem at this convention was because none of the
paperwork was done when I took over in mid-October. I ended up having to do the
majority of the paperwork, I and my officers, at that point.
AggieCon is put together by a student committee at Texas A&M University known as
Cepheid Variable. We wondered if the students joined the committee because they
were serious science fiction fans, or just for social reasons. Both, really. The
majority of the people in there are really interested in science fiction. I,
myself, am very interested in science fiction and fantasy. And it is a pretty
nice social atmosphere also. The majority of the people in the committee are
real good friends, and we get along real well. How many students from Cepheid
Variable work on the convention? We have, if I remember right, 16 officers.
Eight of those have assistants. And we have probably ten of what we term
gofers, which means general officer for everything ridiculous. Basically, they
are the peons in the organization that go and do everything that the rest of us
don't have time for. And then, so far as workers at the convention, just general
committee members that worked, there are probably another ten to twenty of
those. Lewis says the experience of putting on AggieCon is worthwhile, but... I
would say that no one should criticize the way a science fiction fantasy
convention is run until they've been on my end of the deal. Because until you
have tried to set one of these things up, you really don't have any
understanding as to what it takes to do so. All of the paperwork and all of the
correspondence that has to be done, it really is a very big job, and I'm sure
that this year I could not have done it without the help of all of my officers.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. The science fiction of Dean Ing is always
exciting and fast-paced, making it difficult for readers to put his books down.
But his work also has messages to it, some information, some opinions that Ing
wishes to communicate through the entertaining and exciting narrative. Anasazi,
Systemic Shock, and Soft Targets are all good examples of exciting science
fiction novels by Ing, which carry some messages or information along with a
story. Ing bases his writing on ideas, which he's interested in at the time he
writes. He tells us about some of his interests.
There are a couple of themes that have occupied me a lot. I've been talking
about 20 years ago when nobody else cared. Now, a lot of people care. And now
I'm not interested in it much anymore because it's already been, not because of
me, really, but for whatever reason, it has been taken up as an important issue.
The second thing along that line would be survival, not only nuclear survival,
but various other kinds. I write in survival publications. I design backpackers'
wood stoves and all kinds of other gadgetry that would be very useful in
survival contexts. I've had to make my own snowshoes to get out of the High
Sierra one particular summer, which was hardly like a summer at all. It was a
very late spring.
But survival, and particularly the nuclear holocaust survival issue, is one that
I have dealt with for two or three years now.
The End, Ing's latest book, is a good example of his method of writing about his
immediate concerns. It's called Pulling Through, and it's based on the theme of
survival. Pulling Through is a short novel on nuclear survival in the San
Francisco Bay Area. And the short novel is followed in the same book by five
articles, nonfiction articles, detailing some of the gadgetry and techniques
that these people use to stay alive. So that it is not only a fast-paced, short
novel, but it is also a manual of nuclear survival. Ng says he normally tries to
proportion his stories between 90% entertainment and 10% information, but
pulling through is a slight departure from that formula. That is a novel in
which, oh, I must have 20% information in there and only 80% entertainment. But
it is, again, extremely fast-paced. I set a nuclear survival scenario in the
context of a great big overbearing and overwhelming bounty hunter in California.
The kind of guy who, you know, goes around with weapons all the time and has a
fairly high-tech environment. He's a man around whom things just happen, and
they happen fast. But the book is probably 20% information. It's, I guess, the
most thoroughly information-packed novel I've ever written. And the reviews that
are just coming out are very nice reviews. So far, I haven't heard anybody
complain that it's dull. Pulling Through is definitely not a dull novel. It's a
fresh experiment in science fiction and one that will fascinate readers. We hope
Ng continues to include information in his books, along with the narrative.
That's really what science fiction is all about, anyhow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Donald A. Wollheim has been involved in
science fiction for over half a century. His influence has been, and still is,
considerable. He was one of the original fans back in the 30s, and helped start
the famous science fiction group, the Futurians, in New York in the late 1930s.
He's written numerous novels and short stories. He's been an editor of science
fiction for 40 years, and was responsible for the creation of the ace science
fiction line. And today he's head of DAW Science Fiction Books, the publishing
house he founded in 1972. Obviously, Wollheim knows science fiction inside and
out. We asked him to comment on science fiction as a separate category of
literature. Isn't that distinction between science fiction and other fiction,
particularly mainstream, really an artificial one maintained by the publishing
industry? Well, let me put it this way. It is an artificial category. All
literature is literature. But, for the purposes of marketing, it is necessary to
mark out the different genres or categories of what you might call standard
reading. This derives from the fact of the old days of the pulp magazines, when
a magazine was clearly marked a western, or a detective magazine, or a science
fiction magazine. And because it knew that readers who bought that magazine knew
what they were going to get. A mainstream is a very varied product. It consists
of a story of books of modern adventure, books of future life, books of past
life, books of historical, just experimental work. It can be anything. And your
reader of category literature, which is actually, I think, the vast majority,
know what they want. What they want is similar to what they have been reading.
In other words, they don't really want to jump into something which is outside
that which takes them into an escape. They are reading for escape reading. So
you market science fiction because that's what they're looking for. You market a
western if that's what they happen to like. If your western reader picks up
something which is mainstream, he isn't going to like it. It doesn't give him
what he's seeking. The same thing with romance novels. So you have to make it a
category whether the writers like it or not. This is good for marketing. If you
go into any bookshop, a large pay-the-back bookshop, you'll see that they do
this. They put it in separate areas. They market science fiction. They market
romance because they know that people are coming looking for that type of
literature. A science fiction novel published as a mainstream work, unless it's
marvelously good, very well advertised, it's going to be lost. It'll be
forgotten. It won't even be seen. And it certainly won't be reviewed by the
people who read science fiction. They won't tell each other. So for your own
protection, for the author's protection, and for very sound economic reasons,
you do have to list it as a category.
Some people say that science fiction is treated as a second-class form of
literature by critics, that it's unfairly neglected because it is a category
literature. We asked Wolheim's opinion on that notion. Well, I am forced to
agree with those people. The mainstream literature
is, in a sense, regarded as the literature by, let's say, professors of English
and by book critics. And things which are marked in a category style are looked
down upon as hack writing. I see that happen, of course, living in New York. You
see the New York Times book, which was probably one of the most snob organs in
the country, in which they will never review science fiction books if they can
help it. No matter what the critics think, if you like science fiction, you'll
like what Donald A. Wollheim's DAW Books puts out.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.